new post about meltdown-style attacks ready for review (#10)
CHERIoT-Platform/CHERIoT-Platform.github.io: _posts/2024-08-02-meltdown-style-vulnerabilities.markdown

---
layout: post

> title:  "Formal Security Verification for Meltdown-style Vulnerabilities"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
title:  "Formal security verification for speculative-execution vulnerabilities"
```

Author: We would rather stick with the original "Meltdown-style" in the title. Speculative execution is related but it could be confused with Spectre attacks, which requires a different threat model.
We will change the title to lower case.

Reviewer: I don't really like the 'Meltdown' reference because it comes with a lot of baggage related to ring transitions, which is confusing in a system without privilege rings.  In particular, the bug that you discuss lets you leak memory that you don't have access to *via your PCC*, but you may have access to it via another capability, and so it is not necessarily a leak across protection domains, but it is always a violation of the principle of intentionality even when you should be able to access the data.

Author: Ok, yes this might also be confusing. What about:
"Formal security verification for timing side channels in CHERI"
We would also change the first sub-title to :
"What makes a timing side channel attack *Meltdown-style*?"

Author: or rather:
"Formal security verification for timing side channels in CHERI-enhanced processors"
if this is not too long for a title
alternative: without the CHERI at the end:
"Formal security verification for timing side channels"

Reviewer: Happy with either.  I'd also be happy with 'Formally verifying security properties of CHERI processors', since I think your proofs go beyond speculative execution.

Author: We will go with your version; we like the generality.

date:   2024-08-02 14:00:00 +0100
categories: formal verification security
author: "Anna Duque Antón and Johannes Müller"
---

In 2018, the two infamous attacks Spectre and Meltdown raised awareness of timing side channels in the microarchitecture of modern processors.
In the ensuing years, research efforts have been made by academia and industry to investigate and mitigate these findings.
So far, the focus has been on larger cores with powerful performance optimizations such as out-of-order execution and speculation.
But even small processors optimized for low-power environments and featuring in-order pipelines can be vulnerable to these attacks.

> In fact, we have used our new formal verification framework *VeriCHERI* to detect a vulnerability to a Meltdown-style attack in CHERIoT Ibex.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We have used our new formal verification framework *VeriCHERI* to detect a vulnerability to a Meltdown-style attack in CHERIoT Ibex.
This was [reported](https://github.com/microsoft/cheriot-ibex/issues/38) and [fixed](https://github.com/microsoft/cheriot-ibex/commit/876a46ab0746e7b6d7a31a72eb834737d8076aca) in May.
```

The CHERIoT development team fixed this vulnerability by adjusting the fetch FIFO to always behave as if there was an unaligned compressed instruction (``rdata[17:16] != 2'b11``) when there is an address bound violation and the current fetch PC is unaligned.

### How did we detect this vulnerability?

VeriCHERI is a new formal verification framework targeting security vulnerabilities in CHERI-enhanced processors.
The key idea is that we start from abstract security requirements targeting confidentiality and integrity.
Based on these general notions of security, we formulate security properties for the microarchitectural implementation.
This is a significantly different approach compared to previous verification methods, which focus on verifying that the design conforms to a specification.
VeriCHERI allows us to target not only security violations due to functional bugs, but also Meltdown-style timing side channels such as the one described above.
At its core, VeriCHERI consits of only 4 security properties that can be checked using the power of commercial property checking tools.

> Runtimes for CHERIoT Ibex range from a few seconds to 31 minutes for detecting vulnerabilities and to prove that the fixed design is secure.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Verification times for CHERIoT Ibex range from a few seconds to 31 minutes for detecting vulnerabilities in the original versions or to prove that the fixed design is secure.
```

> We refer interested readers to our [paper](https://arxiv.org/abs/2407.18679) about VeriCHERI.

Reviewer: Please can you add this to the bibliography here:

https://github.com/CHERIoT-Platform/CHERIoT-Platform.github.io/blob/main/_bibliography/publications.bib

You can then refer to it as `{% cite name-of-bibTeX-entry-here %}`.  And then add this at the end:

```
Full citation
-------------

{% bibliography --cited %}
```

Author: We added the bibliography entry and linked it in the [latest commit](https://github.com/CHERIoT-Platform/CHERIoT-Platform.github.io/pull/10/commits/8eba69abfc591e1beaa8e820afe199b2e5431755). Did we use the correct syntax?
We would still keep the link to arxiv, if that's ok, since the ACM DOI in the citation does link to the paper yet, as it is not yet officially pubulished.

---
layout: post
title:  "Formal Security Verification for Meltdown-style Vulnerabilities"
date:   2024-08-02 14:00:00 +0100
categories: formal verification security
author: "Anna Duque Antón and Johannes Müller"
---

In 2018, the two infamous attacks Spectre and Meltdown raised awareness of timing side channels in the microarchitecture of modern processors.

> In the ensuing years, research efforts have been made by academia and industry to investigate and mitigate these findings.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In the following years, ensuing research efforts have been made by academia and industry to investigate and mitigate these findings.
```

The probing result is then contained in the overall execution time and in the value of a performance counter.

The CHERIoT development team fixed this vulnerability by adjusting the fetch FIFO to always behave as if there was an unaligned compressed instruction (``rdata[17:16] != 2'b11``) when there is an address bound violation and the current fetch PC is unaligned.

### How did we detect this vulnerability?

VeriCHERI is a new formal verification framework targeting security vulnerabilities in CHERI-enhanced processors.
The key idea is that we start from abstract security requirements targeting confidentiality and integrity.
Based on these general notions of security, we formulate security properties for the microarchitectural implementation.
This is a significantly different approach compared to previous verification methods, which focus on verifying that the design conforms to a specification.
VeriCHERI allows us to target not only security violations due to functional bugs, but also Meltdown-style timing side channels such as the one described above.

> At its core, VeriCHERI consits of only 4 security properties that can be checked using the power of commercial property checking tools.

Reviewer 2: This phrasing risks making it sound like there could be more properties that can't be checked by existing tools.  Perhaps coordinated rather clauses than a subordinate clause: "At its core, VeriCHERI consists of only 4 security properties; these can be checked..."

Author: Yes, you are right, we will change it accordingly.
